# Web Content Accessibility Guidelines (WCAG) 2.1

## Transcript

**Sammy:** \[00:00:02\] Live tweet going out now which is usually the
beginning of every one of the live broadcasts I've realized, is talking
about what I tweet I'm not tweet and where are my show notes, here they
are. Thanks for joining us once again. I'm Sammy K. Powers and this is
the PHP Roundtable. This is a live podcast of developers discussing
topics that PHP nerds care about and the ultimate goal of this podcast
is to learn a little something from each other. If you're listening live
and want to be a little part of the shindig send a tweet to PHP
Roundtable. I've got the notifications in front of me. Eric Eggert just
tweeted the live now tweet. Thanks Eric. And we're going to be; he’s
actually on the panel right now. So we're only going talk to these
really cool panel here in just a second.

**Sammy:** \[00:00:46\] So the World Wide Web Consortium also known as
the W3C is an International Standards Organization that has been
creating official recommendations since 1994 and on June 5th 2018 a
brand new official W3C recommendation came fresh out of the oven,
toasted perfectly to a light golden brown. We're talking about the Web
content accessibility guidelines or WCAG 2.1. So what is this WCAG 2.1
thing. It's the latest official recommendation designed to help us Web
nerds make our web apps more accessible to those who need accessibility
accommodations. So really important stuff and that's what we're going to
be talking about today. So now that we know that we're talking about
let's meet our fun loving panel. I have not met. I've only met like one.

**Sammy:** \[00:01:30\] I think it's just met Nic in person. But first
time meeting a few other people and before we get started we're just
sort of chit chat and I can tell this is a really fun loving group of
people so I'm really excited to get to know all of them in a little bit
better but where start off in no particular order. As always we'll start
with Nic Steenhout. Nic is a web accessibility specialist with
Knowability Inc. or Knowbility Inc. I should say. Right. Nic often
speaks at tech conferences about accessibility. And he hosts the A11Y
Rules podcast. Welcome Nic.

**Nic:** \[00:02:07\] Welcome. Thanks for having me.

**Sammy:** \[00:02:09\] Absolutely. We also have the retweeter of
retweets here Eric Eggert. Eric works with Knowbility as well and the
W3C to teach web accessibility. His work is best described by
translating WCAG to human Welcome Eric.

**Eric:** \[00:02:25\] Hello. Thanks for having me.

**Sammy:** \[00:02:27\] Absolutely. We also have Tobias Nyholm. Tobias
is the CEO of a Stockholm-based startup called Happyr. He also maintains
plenty of open source libraries and is a recent member of the symphony
core team. Welcome Tobias.

**Tobias:** \[00:02:41\] Thank you for having me.

**Sammy:** \[00:02:43\] For sure. We also have Glenda Sims who is the
team A11Y accessibility lead at Deque. She has a infectious Open Web
Evangelists active contriubuting member of the W3C WCAG 2.1. Welcome
Glenda.

**Glenda:** \[00:02:57\] Howdy from Texas!

**Sammy:** \[00:02:59\] Woo Texas! We were just talking about the W11Y.
I'm sorry W11Y. I don't know what that would be Wallabilality. This is
A11Y and how to pronounce it. What do we say? A11Y. I look at it and say
“ally” in the background but you were saying that some people do say
that, right.

**Glenda:** \[00:03:17\] Some people say a-one-one-why, some people say
a-eleven-why, some people say ally. And you know in this world of
accessibility that's all welcome.

**Sammy:** \[00:03:25\] That's awesome. A nd they have A11Y Cats, that's
right?

**Glenda:** \[00:03:29\] Yeah that's what Eric got on his T-shirt, right
now very cool.

**Sammy:** \[00:03:34\] Nice.

**Eric:** \[00:03:35\] I'm not used to being t-shirt model. So excuse me
for not having the right post or something. This translates terribly to
a podcast, sorry!

\[00:03:43\] (laughter)

**Sammy:** \[00:03:46\] Yeah, the people who are watching, uhm are
listening on audio are like “Wait, I want to see the shirts” So you have
to go watch the video to see it. Finally we have Sandra Eriksson. Sandra
is a web accessibility specialist at Funka in Stockholm. Sandra spends
her days at the office writing WCAG audits and guiding her clients on
how develop accessible Web sites. Welcome Sandra.

**Sandra:** \[00:04:08\] Thank you.

**Sammy:** \[00:04:10\] So we're finally getting to this topic. I'm
really excited to jump into this as I was kind of preparing for this. I
was kind of looking through all the guidelines and kind of really trying
to get a feel for what WCAG 2.1 is all about. And before we kind of dive
into WCAG I kind of wanted to… Well first of all what is WCAG… We've
been saying wicked. I actually learned from Nic at whatever last
conference we are both at and WCAG is pronounced eick-ag but in episode
69 we were actually talking about how you had these acronyms that don't
necessarily have the vowel sounds to actually pronounce it like JWT.

**Sammy:** \[00:04:46\] We usually sometimes say Jawt, throwing an A in
there. So WCAG, is it the most widely adopted way of pronouncing this,
or….

**Glenda:** \[00:04:56\] That's the way I see it. And that's the way
usually hear it, yes.

**Nic:** \[00:05:00\] I've heard it said wick-ag double-u-cag
double-u-cee-a-gee.It’s a little bit like A-eleven-why or a-eleven-why
or accessibility that as long as you know what you're talking about and
pretty much everybody knows what you're talking about when you start
pulling out those alphabet soup. So it's all good.

**Eric:** \[00:05:23\] Yeah I heard Australians say wuh-cag. So there's
yeah you can say whatever you like.

**Sammy:** \[00:05:33\] I guess as long as it's mutually intelligible.
That's the key is that we're on the same page. Exactly. What did I
think. I think that's kind of part of the what the document actually
talks about and we'll get to in a little bit deeper talking about making
sure that things are mutually intelligible. I do want to kind of look at
before we dive into the docs. Tobias and Sandra were working on
specifically adding some accessibility things to the symphony's form
themes. And I'm kind of curious from you what that process kind of
looked like working together to add accessibility to an open source
project like symphony.

**Tobias:** \[00:06:14\] There was a few months ago. The bootstrap 4
forms theme was \[?\] was announced. So we were working in Bootstrap 4’s
forms theme and we were like hey why don't we make sure this is
accessible for everybody, because everybody building symphony apps on
Bootstrap should be a good good start on building successful websites.
So I created a site where I showed all the items or elements of a
Symphony form. And then I sent that website to Sandra and, Sandra, what
did you do there.

**Sandra:** \[00:06:44\] I did do that much really because I think you
had already done the hard work. I think I had a few opinions about a few
error messages but besides from that I thought it looked really great.
And yeah like you said it a few months ago now so. But I was just
involved in a short period of time and in the end before the deadline so
I wasn't really a part of the process that much.

**Tobias:** \[00:07:18\] I said the process was quite short. I mean I
got some issues from you. You listed three or four issues like for
example there is a make sure a remasters or properly properly shown. I
mean there are message just in plain red and it's been hard to see plain
red if you’re color blind.

**Sandra:** \[00:07:34\] Yeah it look like they have something else
beside the color to point out there is an error.

**Tobias:** \[00:07:42\] So it's I think when I got the list, I added
four or five requests with like just changing 50 lines of code. Those
pull requests questionssaid here is what the accessible expert said,
here is a reference to WCAG and they were fairly quickly merged. And
since, I mean we did one thing we put the error message inside the
labels because then when or you… Why did we do that?

**Sandra:** \[00:08:10\] We do that, because we do that because the
labels are properly connected to each field and when the user has
focused on an input field they will also receive focus on the error
message, when there is one, so that is Funka’s recommendation to to do
it that way. So that's why I recommend that as well.

**Tobias:** \[00:08:33\] We got quite a few questions Symphony to remove
that.

**Sandra:** \[00:08:39\] Oh, that’s funny….

**Tobias:** \[00:08:39\] They were like “Hey, error messages shouldn’t
be in the label because that's wrong”, they said they and tried to
remove it with no particular reason.

**Sandra:** \[00:08:48\] OK, but if they don’t have any reason they
should definitely be there.

**Tobias:** \[00:08:54\] I told them, no, no, this is actually
intentional. We want the error message to be here because of this and
reason, we need to document the code better to make sure nobody ties to
make a pull quest to reverse the changes.

**Sandra:** \[00:09:07\] I suppose, it also depends on where you want to
place the error message because it's very common that you want to play
for error message a message underneath the input field. then it's much
more difficult to embed it inside the label, honestly. Maybe I don't
know. Yeah, I have to keep it that way.

**Tobias:** \[00:09:30\] Yeah. Because that was quite the process. So I
said something to Sandra, Sandra reviewed it and then to make some fixes
them then just rinse and repeat.

**Sammy:** \[00:09:39\] Cool. Now now I'm going to have to make sure
that my next form that I play with because I deal with a lot of forms
for some reason but now I'm going to play with this. Putting that error
message in the label that's really cool.

**Nic:** \[00:09:55\] This is the thing is there's one way to do it. And
yeah and one most frustrating thing answers is I give to a lot of people
asking the questions about accessibility is it is “It depends”. You know
you can do it that way. But there's there's other ways to do it you can
put it in a paragraph after the input field and tied the paragraph to
the input field with aria-described-by. Yeah, there's several different
ways to achieve an accessible results. That doesn't necessarily mean you
have to go one way it depends on your context.

**Sandra:** \[00:10:28\] That is very true. I think the main reason why
we at funka at first hand do not recommend to use WAI-ARIA is that the
support for WAI-ARIA in different screen readers is there is a lot. You
would… It’s possible that you would have a user that has a screen reader
that does not support WAI-ARIA correctly and then that user wouldn’t
perceive that error message at all. So if you can't find other ways to
do it using native elements you should.

**Nic:** \[00:11:02\] So, that is the first ARIA, isn't it. The first
rule of ARIA is “Don’t use ARIA if you can help it”.

**Sandra:** \[00:11:09\] Yeah, exactly!

\[00:11:13\] That's interesting so I'm curious, just sort of on the same
lines like talking about moving the error messages into the label to
kind of make them more accessible. Are there certain common things you
see in the wild that aren't accessible that could have a totally quick
and easy fix to them that would make them accessible by just tweaking
one or two things. And this is just to anybody by the way.

**Nic:** \[00:11:38\] Go on, Eric you're dying to say something.

**Eric:** \[00:11:43\] Well, I mean there are a lot of things that are
like easy fixes. You know one of the biggest mistakes we see is the
alternative text that is just not there. You know when you have an image
you have to describe it for people who can't see it. Another thing is is
fonts and buttons and keyboard interaction. So when people navigate the
site using assistive technology, so a screen reader or a switch input,
and you can google what that is. It's really hard to explain but it's
it's quite interesting so it's basically one big button where you can
move around on the page. They are basically using the website using the
keyboard only so they don't have a mouse attached and they don't use the
mouse. So you have to make sure that everything works. Also with the
keyword. And those are the big things that we see that are really like
mainstream things that are um ah yeah that are basically broken by web
developers every single day because, a standard HTML website is pretty
much accessible. And then you basically take out the accessibility
because you do something fancy and you forget to fix the stuff that you
changed. And that's where WCAG comes in and gives you are good
guidelines where you can test your solutions and say: does this conform
to WCAG, does this are really meet everything I need to think about in
terms of accessibility.

**Sammy:** \[00:13:26\] Interesting so it mainly without doing all the
fancy things were mostly Sybel by default when we stick to the old 1990s
way of doing things. But once we start getting into the latest and
greatest thing that generates all this insanity and on the front-end
then we start like losing accessibility right.

**Eric:** \[00:13:43\] Yes. You can say it like that. The core of every
web technology that id developed is accessible. I mean is not developing
anything that is not accessible in its core. And of course you got so
many things that you can do with javascript and, you know, modern coding
techniques that you can use stuff differently than you intended, than it
was intended. And that can create issues.

**Glenda:** \[00:14:11\] And the way I think about it is that if you use
the native elements accessibility is a freebie. It's already in there.
If you're going to you develop something from scratch you now own the
responsibility to build the accessibility. And so it's not you can't do
anything fancy it's just you just took responsibility.

**Sandra:** \[00:14:36\] That’s very well explained, I think.

**Sammy:** \[00:14:38\] For sure, for sure. I'm curious just sort of
before we jump in I do want to jump in to WCAG officially but there is
one other question that's kind of related to this: On the flip side of
what I was asking about was what's easy to make accessible. Are there
things that are particularly difficult to make accessible on the web.

**Glenda:** \[00:14:54\] So I'm going to answer that case. I first want
to say that I love the ones that are super challenging. And so when I
think about accessibility I like to start with the really hard stuff
like can a blind person drive a car? Not have the car drive for them but
can they drive that car. Can you make a museum accessible. Okay. Those
things are hard. And in that area the things that I find the most
challenging right now are virtual reality. I haven't quite figured out
how to make that accessible and highly visual games. There's a game on
iPhone and Android, called black box, I dear you to go download it and
play it. It is so visual. It's accessible. So you know I think driving a
car by yourself, and virtual reality, those are hard ones.

**Nic:** \[00:15:47\] But the other thing is that most of the people
that are going to listen to this podcast there are developers and I have
yet to meet a developer that doesn't like a coding challenge. So instead
of thinking about accessibility as a hey it's difficult, it’s such a
chore. Why don't you look at it as a coding challenge. You have
parameters to play around. And there you go. There's your coding
challenge. Force yourself to do something you don't normally do and make
yourself better, develop your skills and you're going to find out it's
actually quite fun.

**Eric:** \[00:16:23\] Yeah that's that's a good point. The other thing
is that we see a lot of people doing experimental stuff like you know
really big like the sliders on the whole page or infinite loading Web
site and stuff like that. And that can sometimes be very hard to make
accessible because of the underlying technique used. But in reality 99
percent of all work is the basics, you know, is forms, is links, is a
good document structure. And let's concentrate on that before we think
about what is really hard because you know that's the bulk of work that
needs to be done.

**Sammy:** \[00:17:03\] For sure, for sure. Well this has been good. I
want to start diving into Wicca. But this is the not the the first WCAG
we've seen. This is 2.1 that we're talking about. There is a decade old
WCAG 2.0, so how is WCAG 2.1 different from 2.0, is this like a complete
rewrite or is this like just sort of an addendum?

**Glenda:** \[00:17:23\] It’s 12 new requirements added on to the
already 38 requirements that are in what WCAG 2.0, and when I say 12 new
requirements on top of WCAG 2.0 38, I'm talking about at the A and AA
level. So what WCAG 2.0, even though it's a decade old is solid as a
rock still what you want to do. And then we're adding twelve more
requirements on top.

**Sammy:** \[00:17:53\] Very Cool. So you mentioned A, AA, and AAA. What
what are those things?

**Glenda:** \[00:17:59\] So when they first wrote WCAG 2.0, they wanted
to break it into levels and it giving people an option like perhaps you
might just go to the first level and say: Alright I'm going to unlock
the door for some people with disabilities and let them in. That single
A, like if you don't do single A you've basically left the front door
locked and nobody can get in. Double A is taking more disabilities into
account. And everywhere that I've seen, internationally, in the U.S.,
everybody's requirements are A and double A, when we go all the way to
Triple A. It is… There's some stuff in there that's really fantastic to
do. But it may not be something that we can all do. So Triple A becomes
things you win competitions on or you're like super cool.

**Sammy:** \[00:18:55\] Very Cool. So I'm curious if WCAG get, I know it
hits a wide spectrum of different disabilitys and different devices. Is
it, does it touch anything with tech touch devices or anything like
that.

**Glenda:** \[00:19:13\] Yeah. What can see point one is the first time
we got to pick up touch devices because when WCAG 2.0 was written it was
finalized and published in 2008. Right. Do you remember what your mobile
devices looked like in 2008. They were like candy bar phones, y’know.
And so that was just added. That was one of the big adds in 2.1 Is to
pick up mobile accessibility needs as well as low vision. And one
cognitive, we go a long way to go on cognitive. But we did get one
added.

**Sammy:** \[00:19:50\] So if we're just starting to make our websites
more accessible the first time we've looked at WCAG do we want to start
by looking at 2.0 and then moving to 2.1 or should we just start just
looking at 2.1 straight away.

**Glenda:** \[00:20:01\] So Eric and Nic, what do you think. I knew it I
think.

**Eric:** \[00:20:06\] Well, you know WCAG 2.1 includes everything from
WCAG 2.0, and I think that's something we need to reiterate and
reiterate because it's something that hasn't sunken in with a lot of
people. So I think if you really want to make your accessibility stuff
you know future proof you should dive into WCAG 2.1 Immediately and take
it on. You can you can take the 2.1 stuff on the side and to give that a
lower priority but you should have it on your radar because you know
here in Europe, for example, the the legislative stuff is moving
relatively fast to adopt WCAG 2.1. So there might be regulation coming
at you and then you've got to look up from other people who are still a
decade… a decade behind. You know.

**Nic:** \[00:21:01\] The thing is that 2.1 is adding a few things but
it's not it's not really technically demanding. I had the pleasure of
working with Goodwitch to help make sure that my accessibility rules
podcast was actually 2.1 compliant. It was one of the implementation Web
site for 2.1 going forward and it's not that difficult. Sure you have to
think about things a little bit differently from what you know choose to
think about that. But why not do it. Is there it exists. It's a good
guideline. And ultimately I would hope that people are interested in
implementing accessibility because they want people with disabilities to
be able to use their sites not because they want to be able to take a
checkmark and say hey I comply with 2.0 AA or 2.1 AAA or whatever. So
it's really more about helping us understand how to code our sites to
make sure move more people can then can use them.

**Glenda:** \[00:22:12\] And the cool thing about WCAG 2.1 is that it's
picking up on some areas that like Nic said just broaden your market so
much because low vision. There are so many people with low vision. We
all have low vision when we're trying to use a mobile device in a highly
sunshine vicinity, where you got tons of glare and then mobile devices
and speech as input. Back when WCAG 2.0 was written speeches input was
not very common but we talk to our devices all the time. So there's some
important things in there. And for the record nobility and Nic's work
with the A11Y rules, Funka and Dequeue where already WCAG 2.1 compliant.
In other words: we're doing it. I have… I have customers… Oh! Funka’s is
AAA: Very cool like that.

**Sammy:** \[00:23:16\] That’s awesome. Well if we were if we were to go
look at 2.1 on the Web site it is really long page. It takes a long time
to scroll through, so might be a little daunting.

**Nic:** \[00:23:26\] Try printing it.

**Glenda:** \[00:23:29\] No, don’t.

**Sandra:** \[00:23:30\] Think about the environment, please, don’t
print it.

**Sammy:** \[00:23:33\] Absolutely, the funny thing is there's as long
as there are pages there's technically only 13 official guidelines right
within the whole document.

**Glenda:** \[00:23:43\] So guidelines aren't measurable. So when I saw
your question about the guidelines I think that's a really good way to
think about it from the high viewpoint. But if you're actually going to
test, and I'm sure every other expert on these calls agree with me we
don't just stay at that high level conceptual, we go down to the
individual success criteria of which there are 38 of those checks
success criteria in 2.0 and twelve new ones in 2.1 If you're going to
the level so, it's more, it’s 50 checks.

**Eric:** \[00:24:28\] Yeah, I like the guidelines because they give you
the overview, like erm like something you can aspire to or you know. If
you got the guidelines and you say okay that's that's actually what I'm
working towards. And you got stuff like adaptable distinguishable. You
know those are really catchy words that can guide you through a
designing or devlopment phase of your website and that can help you to
to have your thoughts. And then you look into the success criteria which
give you stuff that you can really test on. So for example before
adaptable it says ah make sure that you can orient your phone or your
device in any way you like. You know and your website doesn't break when
you when you rotated it to landscape. And that's that's important but
you know that's adaptable. And once you read through it once you
probably got that in the back of your head and you're done you know you
don't fix that into one orientation.

**Sandra:** \[00:25:29\] Personally I rarely use the guidelines that
much because from gas developed our own set of requirements that
corresponds to WCAG in different weights. For instance there are one of
our first requirements is that you you should use techniques that can be
used in an accessible way or you should code forms correctly or
whatever. So I use those more than looking at the guidelines but
sometimes I have to go back to WCAG and to read reading to what WCAG
said exactly in order to make a good judgment on how my client responds
to it. So for me our requirements are a bit more specific to measure.

**Eric:** \[00:26:21\] And I think that's that's a good and valid point
and I don't want to get into some sort of place saying that but in
reality you know the WCAG 2.0 and 2.1 success criteria they are written
in a way so they can adapt to a lot of different circumstances. For
example to kiosks or banking terminals or mobile phones, so they can
apply to all of them. And then we got the techniques where you get the
technical details that you can, how you can implement something. And
that's another level deeper than it gets into really a lot of additional
guidance and a lot of many more pages, if youj wants to print it, so
please don't.

**Sammy:** \[00:27:10\] Yeah, the success criteria. That's pretty
interesting. I was reading through those and it's like it's like OK so
here's one success criteria and it gives you one A basically, right. For
this guideline but if you want to take that guideline and make it even
more accessible, here's a double success criteria that you can try. It
is that kind of the philosophy is that like the more success criteria
that you can apply to your Web site the deeper down the accessibility
rabbit holes validation you get, or?

**Glenda:** \[00:27:37\] So what happens is when we're trying to reach
consensus on what's reasonable to say as a requirement, because we
understand that WCAG 2.0, WCAG 2.1 and future WCAGs often get adopted
into legislation. And so what you're going to see is at the A level
you're going to see you've got to do this and then at the Double A
level, Let me be frank, the stuff that the double A level is if you
don't do that you've locked people out with different disabilities. So
they got lower level in the first version. If I were in charge there
would be two levels: The “I need to do this” level and the “I want to be
better” leve, because AA really isn't like a nice-to-have if you've got
low vision if you've got some of these mobile ones you it's just not
work. It's not until we get to the triple A where yes, you're getting
the color contrast has to meet this requirement at the required level.
But if you want to be even cooler, go down to AAA, not all SC even have
that, not all success criteria have “nd here's the deeper”.

**Nic:** \[00:28:54\] I like to use an example that people can really
almost touch. It's like when you're building a house if you were to look
at a single A level. It would be basically make sure you don't have a
step in front of the door. So a wheelchair user can get in. At the
double A level it would be make sure your door is wide enough for all
wheelchairs so that you can have a no step entry. And then that's
accessible for people that use walkers canes and wheelchairs. But a
double level the suddenly someone who uses a power wheelchair, that's a
bit wider, than they too can get into the house. So that's one way to
look at it.

**Glenda:** \[00:29:38\] That’s a good example.

**Sammy:** \[00:29:39\] We should really be shooting for double a at
least and then hopefully get to trieple A eventually, right.

**Glenda:** \[00:29:47\] Triple A, I actually think most people just
picking she except for full got just like. And they just AAA do it.

**Eric:** \[00:30:01\] Yeah but you know if you're picking up shoes from
AAA it depends on the content you have on your site. So for example AAA
has stuff like live captioning for live streaming video if you don't
have live streaming video on your site you don't have to you know whip
up you get to know you get that for free because you're using it so you
don't have to make it accessible.

**Nic:** \[00:30:26\] Sammy, I bet but you didn't know that you needed
to provide captioning for this live podcast, did ya.

**Sammy:** \[00:30:29\] I didn’t until like yesterday when I saw that.
I'm like oh this is embarrassing… I’m having a live stream about this
very topic.

**Glenda:** \[00:30:39\] I can help you. It was really neat because the
environments for humans used to hold the accessibility summit. And I
helped them figure out there's the reason for live captioners and oh it
was it was fun.

**Sammy:** \[00:30:50\] That's awesome. That would be so cool. Yes.

**Glenda:** \[00:30:53\] Captioning is really not anywhere near as
expensive as most people think. I will admit live captioning is a little
pricier but when it comes to captioning something that's recorded. You
can outsource it and it's really reasonably priced. Cool. That's that's
good to hear.

**Sammy:** \[00:31:10\] Yeah definitely. So this is like a spoiler alert
for. Maybe in an episode we're probably going to have in about two or
three months with Nic again bringing in Nic to do a live accessibility
audit of the PHPRoundtable.com web site. It's not designed with
accessibility in mind, it was just like it was just get it out there
fast because I'm busy but then I need it. This is embarrassing to have
actual episodes about accessibility and then not have an accessible
website, like that's kind of like that's kind of that's not okay we're
not actually doing this live that other people can maybe hopefully be
inspired by like oh it actually isn't that hard or like oh I had that
same problem.

**Eric:** \[00:31:46\] So yeah, we love to guilt people into updating
their websites….

**Glenda:** \[00:31:50\] Inspire! Inspire them! (laughter)

**Eric:** \[00:31:50\] In English it's only my second language. So I…
(laughter).

**Sammy:** \[00:32:06\] Well, so diving down into this WCAG document.
It's really long but it is broken up into you four primary principles:
perceivable, operable, understandable, and robust. And this really helps
digest the guidelines a little bit easily a little bit more easilier.
Well a little bit more easilier a little bit more easier.

**Nic:** \[00:32:26\] Is english your first language, Sammy.?

**Sammy:** \[00:32:31\] It’s not, it’s not, I’m actually linguist,
believe it or not. So I was thinking maybe we could just go through each
one of these guidelines or principles. I don't want to say guidelines,
because they're not guidelines, the principles that encompass guidelines
and kind of you all’s thoughts on maybe where you've seen these in the
wild or just kind of just some examples or something like that just kind
of give people a good idea, like, the higher up view of what WCAG 2.1 is
all about. So starting with perceivable, the little little one sentence
thing is information and user interface components must be presentable
to users in the ways that they can perceive. So this means provide text,
like we've mentioned before, text alternatives for non-text content like
images and things like that provide captions and other alternatives for
multimedia which we were just talking about, create content that can be
presented in different ways including by assistive tech including by
assistive technologies without losing meaning which is an interesting
one and make it easier for users to see and hear content. We kind of
we're talking about this one a little bit already but it gets a little
deeper then kind of that the higher up stuff that we've been talking
about right.

**Glenda:** \[00:33:42\] So what I love to think about perceivable is
that we're trying to make sure that the content of our digital content
can get into a person's brain. It's perceivable even get it into your
brain. And what are the new requirements in WCAG 2.1. We had a color
contrast requirement in 2.0 but it's only for text. And so if you have
anything important on your Web site that's not text that's an image
maybe you got the picture of a printer to print something but there's no
words around it. There's no requirement that that printer be visible. It
can be the lightest Grey. On another light gray where a 20 year old with
20/20 vision can see it, but the rest the world is going “what? what?”.
So that's an additional requirement that I'm happy to see in 2.1 – make
those important non-text objects have decent color contrast.

**Sammy:** \[00:34:51\] Very cool. So Perceivable is the first of the
four principles. We have another one operable user interface components
and navigation must be operable. Now these by the way these little
bullet points I'm taking from are from the weekend to point one at a
glance page on the W3C website. It's… do I say that right, W3C. I always
say either WC3 or W3C….

**Glenda:** \[00:35:18\] W3 – World Wide Web Consortium.

**Sammy:** \[00:35:21\] I switch the 3 and the C around all the time
without even knowing it. So I at least had to double check to make sure
it's clear but there is a Web site or a page out there on the website
that's called to one at a glance we'll get a link to an it so you can
see all of these bullet points in front of your face. But ahm for
operable, it says these guidelines are make all functionality available
from a keyboard which I guess removing like. I think it's really popular
back in the day to remove the focus attribute or the focus using
stylesheets, right because it gets people didn’t like that little
outline that happened when you click on things.

**Nic:** \[00:35:54\] Funny thing I was actually just speaking with Eric
Meyer for my podcast last week and I discussed that with him because he
he admits to one of his sin. He wasn't really thinking that people
wouldn't read the notes and the CSS reset stylesheet. That said you know
we're setting that to zero but it's up to you to design it. But people
weren't going back and redesigning it so he removed that from his
version two of the CSS reset but then it was too late. It was… It was
adopted Bootstrap and to Wordpress and everybody thought “Ah well if
Wordpress does that then we should do it” and it became a really massive
pain point for from an excited keyboard user's perspective. So yeah. If
you have links dont remove the default outline. Just dont. Really, don’t
do it!

**Sammy:** \[00:36:59\] The other point operable. Always give users
enough time to read and use content. Do not use content that causes
seizures or physical reactions which is one that they feel like comes
up… Was it the Incredibles, the latest Incredibles movie has has a
problem with people who have seizures can't watch can't watch them the
movie. So it's not an accessible movie. That’s really weird.

**Nic:** \[00:37:27\] One of the things to consider is that it might not
be a promo triggering a full hour grand mal seizure but it can be as
simple as someone is going to get so nauseated that you have to go lay
for an hour or two. It's it's a wide range. We shouldn't always think of
the edge cases of someone is going to fall flat on the ground and flip
like a fish out of water. That's that's not it. It can be a whole range
of different reactions that are pretty disturbing. Uncomfortable
reactions so it's it's something we don't want to do.

**Sammy:** \[00:38:02\] Totally.

**Sandra:** \[00:38:05\] And I suppose in some cases you don't even need
a disability to get affected, it enough being burned out or something.
Yeah.

**Sammy:** \[00:38:21\] Absolutely. Well the final two guidelines under
operable: Help users navigate and find content and finally make it
easier to use inputs other than the keyboard. Now that's an interesting
one because I guess just without actually diving into that when I
haven't looked at that one in detail but just thinking of how many times
I've tried to hijack an input to form a credit card number or format a
phone number something not even really knowing if that's going to work
with out a keyboard. Do any of you have any particular experience with
making sure that the inputs work with something other than a keyboard or
any thoughts on that.

**Glenda:** \[00:38:56\] Absolutely. When was the last time you talked
to your car. Did you use a keyboard when you were talking your car and
telling it where you wanted to go. No, you were using voice input. So
voice input is a wonderful example of not using a keyboard. There are
many others.

**Nic:** \[00:39:17\] I know someone who was a star skier and she skied
into a tree and became paralyzed from from the neck down and she uses a
technology called sip and puff. Basically it's a straw and she sips and
puffs in different patterns and that allows her to control a wheelchair
going forward backwards, stop, turn, what not. She also does solo
sailing so she goes into a sailboat and she controls her entire sail
boat with that sip and puff technology. She says one of the biggest
frustration she has is some website will just not work with her sip and
puff access to you know she's basically using a switch a variation on
keyboard and she can't use Web sites and she can sail across the Channel
between France and England by herself in a sailboat. But she can't use
your website.

**Sammy:** \[00:40:17\] Wow.

**Glenda:** \[00:40:20\] That's a great story.

**Sammy:** \[00:40:21\] Yeah. Well looking at the third of the fourth
four principles: Understandable. Information and the operation of user
interface must be understandable. And so there's three main guidelines
under this which is make tax readable and understandable make content
appear and operate in predictable ways and help users avoid incorrect
mistakes. This one almost feels like just more more like just improving
user interface design for everybody. Right.

**Glenda:** \[00:40:58\] It is.

**Eric:** \[00:40:59\] Yeah you can totally see that. So a lot of
accessibility improvements help everyone, You know. The difference is
that for people with disability it's really really really important, you
know it's, because they otherwise have big barrier and probably can't
overcome it. So yeah I mean everything that is in the section is giving
you time to to make sure you have put in the right data and and
everything is described nicely and in a way that you can, you can
understand that that's really important and that you know where you are
in a process. When you're out in the shopping cart that you can clearly
and easily and simply identify where you are and what you need to do
next.

**Glenda:** \[00:41:53\] My favorite experience when I was working at
the University of Texas at Austin and working with Dr John Slatin, who
was a blind professor. I would go and test our new website redesign with
John and what I would learn every single time is that we had a fault in
our early designs that he would pick up on faster than any sighted
person. And for him like Eric said that fault in the design and the
accessibility problem would be a barrier. Once he pointed it out to me I
would go: Oh it would be better for everyone if we redesigned that. And
it might have to do with an error message that you know sighted people
are like: Oh what just happened… Oh!. You know, and but for John he
would go: Glenda I don't know it happened and it was wall.

**Eric:** \[00:42:50\] Yeah and I think it's also important to are
follow the three principles that you already named. It's really
important that those are principles that are not only are are
addressable in the code, you know. You have to you have to start from
the beginning from the design stage from the planning stage. Like when
you have life video you know who is doing the life captioning, as an
example, or who is doing the captioning afterwards. If you want to go to
AA. That stuff is a way where you have to come in and you have to plan
and manage your accessibility. And it's not just throwing a line of code
somewhere. That's not how that works.

**Sammy:** \[00:43:37\] True, ture. Well moving onto the final
principle: it's robust. Content must be robust enough that it can be
interpreted by a wide variety of user agents including assistive
technologies and the guidelines that maximize capability with current
and future user tools. All right that's compatability: Maximize
compatibility with current and future user tools. So what? I'm not. I
don’t know – I don't quite understand what specific examples or what
kind of what this one's kind of shooting for. Then it seems like you
just kind of want to make sure that you like we were talking about
earlier with where you put the error message, putting it inside the
label seems a more robust way versus using the ARIA tags, is that kind
of what robustness is shooting after.

**Glenda:** \[00:44:25\] So that area down there when I think of it
there's there's two main pieces in 2.0, and that is did you write your
code according to standard, can it parse correctly by assistive
technologies or any technologies that we are not even aware of yet. So
one of the recommendations, I bet Funka does it, is validate to the HTML
standard. If you're writing HTML, validate to the dang standard. So
that's the first one, it has to do with passing. And then the second one
is name role value. Remember when we talked about the responsibility of
the developer when they decide to build a widget. If you were gonna use
a form control, a radio button, something like that and you're just
gonna use native HTML, everything's already built in to that radio
button from HTML. But if you're gonna build from scratch using a div and
javascript then you've got to give it a name and a role and a value. It
is a button and what is its role here and what is its actual value.
Those things don't come for free. So that area down there is for when
you're building from scratch.

**Eric:** \[00:45:37\] Yes. And you also have to think about the proper
use of the keyboard. So building an input of whatever from scratch you
have to follow the aria authoring practices document that has like
really outlined what you need to implement in javascript to make it work
like you know the same thing on the desktop or built in HTML. And that's
usually a lot of work. So better use the stuff that's written in the
first place. That's what I always recommend. And in 2.1 there's also
status messages, which is new, right. So can you talk a bit about what
that does.

**Glenda:** \[00:46:24\] So status messages if we interpret many of us
that are already in love with accessibility have already been making
status messages, error messages apparent to screen readers by default.
But WCAG 2.0 only said the error message must be available in text,
which means a developer can throw an error message on the screen and not
tell the screen reader, the person who is blind that that new content
has been added. So you and I saw it because it was big and it was bold
and it made the page kinda changed. But the screen really user it
happened above where their focus is. How do they know to go easter egg
hunting for it up there. And so the new requirement on any new content
that truly is a status message that you would need to understand to know
something was successful or there was an error or to move forward in the
process. You now have to programmatically make it possible for assistive
technology to know: new content here. It's up here.

**Sammy:** \[00:47:29\] This was sort of like a flash message, so like
you a create something and then it refreshes the page and it has that
new status message at the top. It's like a flash mess is only there for
that one session. You like programmatically making sure that assistive
technologies can see oh that's the message they need to see on this
page?

**Glenda:** \[00:47:44\] And whether it's a toast message that pops up
or one that just occurred above where you are because understand a
screen reader is working linearly so they were down at that submit
button and when they try to press submit and the page didn't submit
because they had error and you threw in the error message up here. Their
focus is still down on the submit button. How did they know that error
message got added there. You and I see it because it was red and flashed
at us. Or maybe we saw it. How many times have you been on a form where
you are like enter, why wont this enter? And it’s like there's a little
error message up there but it's so like not paying attention. So the
cool thing is, while I just described it from a screenwriter's
perspective. There's a big cognitive perspective here. Help me, help all
of us, understand where this new content changed. So that's what we get
into the fun stuff when it's not just helping one disability type, but
actually makes it better for all.

**Sammy:** \[00:48:49\] Yeah. I think that's a really really huge
selling point especially when talking with shareholders and being like
hey like we need to go through and you know make this more accessible
and they're like well we don't have anybody that needs that. No, no, no,
let me talk about how this improves the overall user interface and
experience for literally every single person who views this Web site.
That's the core selling point.

**Nic:** \[00:49:08\] You know the other thing on this we don't have
anybody who comes to our site that needs accessibility. Way back when I
lived in Chicago and I found a mechanic, he was brilliant. He fixed cars
quickly. He was honest, he wasn't expensive. The only problem is you had
a step in and Transend to tours is right to his office. And third time I
went to see him as a pet. You got to put a ramp in and he says why
should I put a red in. You're the only person in a wheelchair that comes
to see me. And I said Pete, look at the step. Why do you think that is
that nobody in wheelchairs come to see you. And suddenly I that a penny
drop. It's like oh my god. Spent three hundred dollars put in a ramp
into his office and suddenly I was able to refer him a dozen other
people in a wheelchair that needed a reliable mechanic. So you know
sometimes maybe you don't have anybody that has a disability because
they can't get in. Then again on the Web we don't have any metrics. We
don't have any way to measure who comes to our site with a screen reader
who uses keyboard only, who is colorblind. We don't have that
information so we can't assume that we don't have anybody any visitors
or even any of our staff that don't have disabilities. I know I know
actually web designers are colorblind you know and it seems weird but,
we're out there people with disabilities, we're out there. There's 20
percent of the population that has a disability so you can't say oh
nobody with disability comes to our site because you just don't know,
right.

**Sammy:** \[00:50:54\] You may have just locked them out, like you
said, like they are not there because you locked them out.

**Eric:** \[00:50:59\] Yeah yeah. And from my experience, a lot of times
accessible solutions, once they are found by someone they spread around
like wildfire. So one of the conferencing options was very is very
accessible. And now everyone is using them because it's such an
accessible thing and it just you know it just spread around so it it
makes sense to be implement it and just, you know, make make a point of
catering for, not just for, you know a majority.

**Sammy:** \[00:51:34\] For sure, for sure. Well this has been really
good. We do have to kind of wrap it up because it's getting close to
that wrap-up time. And I have more notes here. I think we probably have
to just maybe copy paste these into the next accessibility episode like
I mentioned before in a couple months when we bring Nic back on to do
live accessibility audit of the PHP Roundtable make me feel really bad
about all my code but that's ok.

**Glenda:** \[00:51:54\] Inspire you!

**Sammy:** \[00:51:56\] Exactly, inspire. And I'm totally ok with being
the one that gets picked at to inspire others and be like, hey his code
sucks too I don't feel so bad. So I definitely hope that inspires others
to kind of try to make their sites more accessible. I already I know
you've got this probably in your shameless plug Nic but you have a Web
site out there specifically for making podcasts more accessible and I've
gone through and I started kind of preemptively thinking like oh let's
see if I like how good I'm doing so far and I'm like it's kind of been
like oh boy I’m in for a lot of things through this live accessibility
audit. But the developer shout-out is that typically the segment that we
transition into next which is recognizing a developer in the community
for doing something awesome. But for this episode I dropped the ball on
the developer shout-out again, and this is like I keep doing this I
apologize it is just kind of busy. There's a couple of quite a few
sponsors actually who have been reaching out to me wanting to sponsor
episodes and I haven't been giving them that the stats and sponsorship
prospect this stuff that they need. I finally got one after what I think
four years of having a podcast I finally have a sponsorship prospect.
This PDF I can send people because I had no way of tracking the
analytics just because like this is not something that I'm care I care
more about just getting the content out there and sharing knowledge
versus like trying to like monetize and like track and analyze and all
that stuff. So this stuff is sort of coming like four years later
because you know the number one thing for me is the education aspect and
making sure that we're all continuing our education together. So let's
wrap this thing up with some shameless promos. I know some of you have
some some fun things to promote so let's kick it off maybe Eric do you
want everything you want to shamelessly promote.

**Eric:** \[00:53:38\] Yes I can shamelessly promote the new Web site of
the Web Accessibility Initiative were I worked on the group with the
Education and Outreach working group. So if you're interested in WCAG
2.1 guidance and you know techniques and stuff like that. Go to a
w3.org/WAI and we got a lot of stuff there. For example we got the
accessibility fundamental section which has the accessibility principles
outlined in a very nice way and really easy to understand, I hope. If
you've got any feedback you can contribute on GitHub. So if you don't
understand something, let us know. We want to the site that's really
important. And yeah I'm really proud of the site and that we have all
that guidance now in the format that you can actually find it, because
that was very hard before.

**Sammy:** \[00:54:36\] For sure, for sure. Glenda, do you have anything
that you want to promote, aka Goodwitch, right.

**Glenda:** \[00:54:40\] I did. I did. So one of the questions we didn't
get to is how can people go about using automation to do accessibility
testing. And I want to tell everybody about a tool called Axe: a x e. It
is the accessibility engine. And if they just just Google A X E and
accessibility, you're gonna hit it. It's an open source tool that you
can download an extension into using your browser. Or if you're really
\[?\] you can actually pull the core engine in and run it during when
your programmers are testing at that code stage, not just the browser
stage. So that's that's the big plug that I wanted to make. And for
anybody wanting to learn a little bit more about accessibility check out
Deque University.

**Sammy:** \[00:55:36\] Excellent. What about you, Nic. Do you have
anything you would promote?

**Nic:** \[00:55:40\] Oh so many things but I'll limit myself to just
one. Check out the accessibility rules podcast a-one-one-y-r-u-l-e-s dot
com. There is a long form podcast. There's also a series of five to 10
minute segments the sound bites where people with disabilities that tell
us in their own words what bears they encounter on the Web. And I even
now have series started long form in French. So here you go.

**Sammy:** \[00:56:13\] Very cool. What about you, Sandra, anything you
want to promote?

**Sandra:** \[00:56:17\] Now I can't say I have. I haven't prepared
anything, so I'm going to check out the other tips I got here so it's
going to be really interesting to see the at least the AXE accessibility
thing. I don't normally I don't normally use any automatic tools, so
it's going to be interesting.

**Sammy:** \[00:56:41\] Oh yeah, sounds good. Like you Tobias, do you
have anything you want to promote.

**Tobias:** \[00:56:46\] Think I want to shamelessly promote myself, I’m
doing some workshops iin the next few months. In Croatia web summer camp
and then Symphony Live, Berlin. So if you want to learn some more coding
with me, I think there are still some tickets left to Croatia.

**Sammy:** \[00:57:08\] Very cool, awesome. Well our next episode will
be one that we've tried to schedule for probably a year now and has
never been able to nail down a date and time. Sometimes it's really hard
to nail down a date and time when working with for 5 different people's
schedules. So that one is concurrency generators in core routines, oh
my. We're finally going to be talking about this episode. It's been
sitting on the docket for so long. It's happening July 26 at 11:00a.m.
EDT that's Eastern Daylight Savings Time. So if you have been waiting
for that episode it's finally going to get here. We're going to have
another one a couple of other upsets coming down the pipe. Docblocks,
annotations and the like, which should be an interesting episode. And
then the GDPR for PHP devs. It's a little bit late to the party on GDPR
stuff, but hey it still affects us so why not talk about it and then all
things Drupal is also slated. There's a bunch of other episodes coming
down the pipe. If you have something that you'd like to share on the PHP
Roundtable, maybe a topic that you'd like to hear something that you'd
like to join the panel for. Just hit me up on Twitter. I'm Sammy Kaye or
you can ping the peace Roundtable on Twitter. There's also a form on the
PHPRoundtable.com that you can fill out be like. I want to talk abouit
this or I want to hear about this. Oh my goodness this has been a great
panel. I'd like to thank, who do we have here: Eric, Glenda, Nicholas,
Sandra and Tobias for joining us in this episode and we'll see you folks
in the next episode.

**Nic:** \[00:58:23\] Thank you Sammy.

**Eric:** \[00:58:25\] T hank you.

**Sandra:** \[00:58:25\] Yeah, Thanks.

**Glenda:** \[00:58:25\] To Accessibility!
